104 Ad Martyres.

preclude its date being fixed as late as 202 or 203. The
Catholic tone of the Address might at first sight seem to
bar a later date for it than about 200, but the Address to
Scapula written in 212 is equally free from any signs of
Montanism; while various reasons combine to lead to the
conclusion that Perpetua and her friends, although they may
have belonged to the stricter party in the African Ohurolg
were Catholie, and not, ashes been asserted, Montanist,
confessore. They had not separated from the communion of
the Church, nor do they once mention the Paraclete in their
accounts of their visions. And surely the Catholic' bishop
Optatus, in the vision of Saturus, would have been reproved
in very different terms had the martyra been Montanists.
Whatever the views of the editor and supplementer of the

Visions may have been-and they do not appear to have ’

been those of a keen Montanist, for the tone of the Acts
cannot be said to demand such an author-it is hard to see
why they should be held to reflect upon the character of the
belief of the martyrs.

An interesting example of Tertullian's concontration of
vision and immersion in the point before him is seen in his
treatment of the martyrs’ prison which he views under five
different aspecta (see the notes). This tendeney towards the
overdevelopment of an idea is characteristic of our author,
and in his polemieal treatises sometimes leads him to indulge
in unsatisfactory methods of argument. But the ‘Ad

Martyras' is wholly devoted to hracing the courage of the
condemned confessore, and is charged with the breath of

that sympathy and encouragement which springs only from
a deep and inspiring saith.

¹ Hamis v. s. pp. 2 ff.

 

